docs: DOC-1366: Fix typos and add memory considerations for Python UDFs (#7999)
deephaven/deephaven-core: docs/python/conceptual/python-java-boundary.md

Here's a screenshot showing execution times between the built-in query language [`sin`](https://deephaven.io/core/javadoc/io/deephaven/function/Numeric.html#sin(double)) function, and [`numpy.sin`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.sin.html):

> ![Print statements. The built-in sin function took 0.045 seconds, while Numpy's sine function took 1.341 seconds](../assets/conceptual/sine-timed.png)

Reviewer: You changed "built-in sine" to "built-in sin". Seems like you should do the same for "Numpy's sine". Perhaps scan the doc for similar inconsistencies.

> ![Print statements. The built-in sine function took 0.045 seconds, while Numpy's sine function took 1.341 seconds](../assets/conceptual/sine-timed.png)

Reviewer 2: I would say "sin" not "sine" here.

## Memory considerations

When using [Python user-defined functions (UDFs)](../how-to-guides/python-functions.md) in Deephaven query strings, Python memory is allocated outside the Java heap. This has important implications:

- **OOM risk** — When total process memory grows too large, the Linux Out-Of-Memory (OOM) killer may terminate processes. This can happen when the combined Java heap and Python memory exceed the available system or container memory.
- **Unbounded memory growth** — Python objects allocated during UDF execution can accumulate over time, especially in long-running or high-throughput queries. This can lead to resident memory far exceeding the configured Java heap size.

### Recommendations

To minimize memory risks when using Python UDFs:

- **Convert performance-critical UDFs to Java** — For frequently called functions, consider implementing them in Java or using built-in query language functions instead.

> - **Avoid returning large Python objects in UDFs** — They can remain in Python memory for extended periods, and if not freed in a timely manner, may cause a Python `MemoryError` and crash the worker process. Instead, when possible, have UDFs return only the data needed for table columns, which are typically primitive types and text. In situations where Java is not actively garbage collecting unused table columns that store Python objects, `deephaven.gc_collect()` can be used to attempt to trigger Java GC, but keep in mind that it is advisory only.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Avoid returning large Python objects in UDFs** — They can remain in Python memory for extended periods, and if not freed in a timely manner, may cause a Python `MemoryError` and crash the worker process. Instead, when possible, have UDFs return only the data needed for table columns, which are typically primitive types and text. In situations where Java is not actively garbage collecting unused table columns that store Python objects, you can use `deephaven.gc_collect()` to attempt to trigger Java GC, but keep in mind that it is advisory only.
```

Not only that, but Deephaven has its own [classes and methods built into the query language](../how-to-guides/built-in-functions.md).

For guidance on using date-time types efficiently, see [Time in Deephaven](./time-in-deephaven.md).

## How to minimize the number of boundary crossings

Efficient queries typically make minimal Python-Java boundary crossings. They all have one thing in common:

**They use Java methods and variables built-in to the query language.**

When there is a one-to-one translation for a function, you should prefer to use the Java equivalent. If there is no Java equivalent, simply be aware of the size of your data and the number of boundary crossings. In the above example, processing 100,000 rows took an additional 13 milliseconds. If as in this case your data is not large, then 13ms is very likely an acceptable trade-off for simple development.

## Memory considerations

When using [Python user-defined functions (UDFs)](../how-to-guides/python-functions.md) in Deephaven query strings, Python memory is allocated outside the Java heap. This has important implications:

> - **OOM risk** — When total process memory grows too large, the Linux Out-Of-Memory (OOM) killer may terminate processes. In a Kubernetes environment, if the worker's allocated heap and non-heap memory exceed the permitted size, that worker is terminated. In a bare metal environment, the kernel may select any process co-located with the worker on the same machine. If the OOM killer selects the dispatcher, all workers on the machine terminate.

Reviewer 4: 'dispatcher ' is mentioned here but it is an Enterprise component, so is PQ (mentioned below). I am wondering if we want to prefix them with 'In Deephaven Enterprise' or something more dramatic (such as letting Enterprise own this doc) as not to confuse the readers.

- **Unbounded memory growth** — Python objects allocated during UDF execution can accumulate over time, especially in long-running or high-throughput queries. This can lead to resident memory far exceeding the configured Java heap size.

### Recommendations

To minimize memory risks when using Python UDFs:

- **Convert performance-critical UDFs to Java** — For frequently called functions, consider implementing them in Java or using built-in query language functions instead.

> - **Avoid allocating large Python objects in UDFs** — Minimize the creation of large data structures within UDF code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Avoid returning large Python objects in UDFs** — they could stay in the Python memory for a long time and if not freed in a timely fashion, would cause Python MemoryError and crash the worker process. Instead, if possible, make the UDFs to only return the data needed for the table columns, which usually are primitive types and text. In situations where Java is not actively garbage collecting unused table columns that store Python objects, deephaven.gc_collect() may be used to attempt to trigger Java GC, but keep in mind it is advisory only.
```

Efficient queries typically make minimal Python-Java boundary crossings. They all have one thing in common:

**They use Java methods and variables built-in to the query language.**

When there is a one-to-one translation for a function; you should prefer to use the Java equivalent. If there is no Java equivalent, simply be aware of the size of your data and the number of boundary crossings. In the above example, processing 100,000 rows took an additional 13 milliseconds. If as in this case your data is not large, then 13ms is very likely an acceptable trade-off for simple development.

## Memory considerations

When using Python user-defined functions (UDFs) in Deephaven query strings, Python memory is allocated outside the Java heap. This has important implications:

> - **Configure Additional Memory** - If a query is known to use significant Python resources you should configure "Additional Memory" in the Code Studio or Advanced Settings in the Persistent Query configuration. On bare metal or podman, this setting is advisory and not enforced; it simply prevents the dispatcher from starting more queries. On Kubernetes, this permits the pod to use more memory.

Reviewer: This "Configure Additional Memory" item actually seems like it should be in the "Recommendations" section instead.

> - **OOM risk** — When total process memory grows too large, the Linux Out-Of-Memory (OOM) killer may terminate processes. In a Kubernetes environment, if the worker's allocated heap and non-heap memory exceed the permitted size; that worker is terminated. In a bare metal environment, the kernel may select any process co-located with the worker on the same machine. Therefore, it is best practice to segregate infrastructure processes from query processes. It is not possible to segregate the Query Dispatcher process, which starts workers. If the OOM killer selects the dispatcher, then all workers on the machine terminate.

Reviewer: These sentences "Therefore, it is best practice to segregate infrastructure processes from query processes. It is not possible to segregate the Query Dispatcher process, which starts workers." seem like they should be in "Recommendations" instead.

- **Unbounded memory growth** — Python objects allocated during UDF execution can accumulate over time, especially in long-running or high-throughput queries. This can lead to resident memory far exceeding the configured Java heap size.

> - **OOM risk** — When total process memory grows too large, the Linux Out-Of-Memory (OOM) killer may terminate processes. In Deephaven Enterprise environments, this can affect the dispatcher process, potentially bringing down all child workers.

Reviewer: "OOM risk" is already covered on line 102.

> **They use methods and variables built-in to the query language.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**They use Java methods and variables built-in to the query language.**

When there is a one-to-one translation for a function; you should prefer to use the Java equivalent.  If there is no Java equivalent, simply be aware of the size of your data and the number of boundary crossings.  In the above example, processing 100,000 rows took an additional 13 milliseconds.  If as in this case your data is not large, then 13ms is very likely an acceptable trade-off for simple development.
```

## Memory considerations

When using Python user-defined functions (UDFs) in Deephaven query strings, Python memory is allocated outside the Java heap. This has important implications:

- **Python memory is not bounded by the Java heap** — The `-Xmx` JVM setting controls only the Java heap size. Python objects created by UDFs exist in a separate memory space that can grow independently.
- **Unbounded memory growth** — Python objects allocated during UDF execution can accumulate over time, especially in long-running or high-throughput queries. This can lead to resident memory far exceeding the configured Java heap size.

> - **OOM risk** — When total process memory grows too large, the Linux Out-Of-Memory (OOM) killer may terminate processes. In Deephaven Enterprise environments, this can affect the dispatcher process, potentially bringing down all child workers.

Reviewer 2: In Deephaven Enterprise environments, you must account for this additional memory usage:
```suggestion
- **Configure Additional Memory** - If a query is known to use significant Python resources you should configure "Additional Memory" in the Code Studio or Advanced Settings in the Persistent Query configuration.  On bare metal or podman, this setting is advisory and not enforced; it simply prevents the dispatcher from starting more queries.  On Kubernetes, this permits the pod to use more memory.
- **OOM risk** — When total process memory grows too large, the Linux Out-Of-Memory (OOM) killer may terminate processes.  In a Kubernetes environment, if the worker's allocated heap and non-heap memory exceed the permitted size; that worker is terminated.  In a bare metal environment, the kernel may select any process co-located with the worker on the same machine.  Therefore, it is best practice to segregate infrastructure processes from query processes.  It is not possible to segregate the Query Dispatcher process, which starts workers.  If the OOM killer selects the dispatcher, then all workers on the machine terminate.
```

> [!CAUTION]
> A query with a 16 GB Java heap using Python UDFs heavily can grow to 100 GB or more of resident memory. Monitor system memory usage when deploying Python-heavy queries in production.

> 

Reviewer 2: Throwing up random numbers doesn't make sense.
```suggestion
```

### Recommendations

To minimize memory risks when using Python UDFs:

- **Convert performance-critical UDFs to Java** — For frequently called functions, consider implementing them in Java or using built-in query language functions instead.
- **Avoid allocating large Python objects in UDFs** — Minimize the creation of large data structures within UDF code.
- **Monitor resident memory** — Track total process memory, not just Java heap usage, for queries using Python UDFs.

> - **Use vectorized operations when possible** — NumPy vectorized operations on entire columns (outside query strings) are often more memory-efficient than per-row UDF calls.

Reviewer 2: Extracting data from the table doesn't make sense for incremental operations; so not a great overall recommendation or encouragement.
